so this talk is another of the series
that are given on various cruise ships
and is one of my favorites
I chose their title children of another
son as a deliberate double meaning
because we're going to talk about the
planets of other stars and we're also
going to talk about the possibility that
those planets might have their own life
on them so our neighboring planetary
system looks like this these are some is
that both taken from my home observatory
here just outside Cambridge so along the
top row we have mercury always very
difficult to take a decent image of
because it's so small and always so near
the Sun in the sky that the background
sky is always rather bright then we've
got the crescent of Venus now you can
see Venus in the sky this evening very
very bright indeed but all we ever see
is the cloud tops of course because of
such a thick atmosphere which we've
talked about in some of the other talks
in this series then I've got a nice
little image of Mars showing the polar
caps and some of the dark regions and
the dusty red deserts and even a little
bit of wispy ice cloud in the morning
sky on Mars there now those three plus
the earth of course are the inner rocky
planets of the solar system then along
the bottom we've got the gas giants
Jupiter with its cloud belt and Great
Red Spot Saturn with its amazing rings a
little bit smaller than Jupiter but of
course it looks even smaller here
because these are real images are all
taken to a common camera so Saturn being
further away looks disproportionately
small and then the green and the blue
dots of Uranus and Neptune even further
away and really difficult for an amateur
to image at all in fact so that's what
the planetary neighbors in our back
look like and it would be quite a
surprise if our son was alone in having
such a family of pets in our galaxy
alone there are around 400 billion stars
this of course is not a picture of our
galaxy we live inside it and therefore
we can't get a spacecraft to go far
enough up above the plane of the galaxy
and look down and see such a marvelous
array of spiral arms but this is a
neighboring galaxy taken showing that
yellow color in the nucleus and the
bluer colors of the stars in the spiral
arms plus a lot of dirty brown dusty
regions and of course it's those dirty
debt brown dusty regions that are of
interest from the point of view of
possible planet formation there without
many with that many stars in the galaxy
it would be very strange if our solar
system was the only star to have a
family of planets as I said but until
the late 20th century that still
remained a possibility of course we've
now discovered that there are thousands
of others out there and this talk really
is the story of that discovery but for a
very long time there are ideas that our
Sun might have had a freak encounter
with another star that had pulled a
streamer of material off it and that the
planets have condensed from that and
that that would mean that planetary
systems would be incredibly rare and so
we might be the only one in the Milky
Way galaxy for example to have any
planets at all it's very difficult to
answer the question and a lot of
speculation went on during the last
century but we do now know the answer so
the question really is how and the
problem with trying to detect planets
around other stars is they're very very
difficult to spot planets of course only
reflect
light of their parents star and don't
shine on their own and so this
neighboring star is around about 1
billion times brighter than a typical
planet as seen from the earth so it's
like trying to see a firefly next to a
searchlight as in this graphic here only
much much worse the difference is even
greater but surprisingly scientists
being such clever people have managed to
fit and what they use is a device called
a coronagraph which is originally
invented for studying the atmosphere of
the Sun by creating a mini eclipse
inside the telescope what you can see in
this picture is a white and blue mass of
light with a shadow of a round disc
being held by two arms that disc the
black disc in the center there is
creating a miniature Eclipse blocking
out the direct path from the light from
the star and some of the light of course
is escaping around it by diffraction no
instrument is ever perfect and that's
what's giving the white and the blue
fringes around the central obstruction
but what it has enabled us to do is
block out that light and reveal the
planet below the little dot is the
planet beta Pictoris EB and it was
imaged directly using this instrument in
2003 that was the first time that we'd
actually imaged a planet of another star
there's a very nice sharp little image
in its own right
the same techniques being used here
without obscuring discs in the center of
the optical path to block out the light
from the star former hope and it's
created this diffraction pattern around
it that looks rather like the Eye of
Sauron if anyone's familiar with Lord of
the Rings but we have a little tiny
insect there showing a little dot and
it's moved between 2004 and 2006 and
that is a planet forming in the dust
ring around former holt
now it's a growing planet and the big
ring of dust around is real the ring of
red dust in their image is part of the
dust ring out of which the planetary
material is being gathered together by
gravity and formed into what will turn
out to be a family of new planets I'm
sure the corona f-type image and this
time we caught a whole family of planets
the blue and red mess in the middle is
the stray light that we have tried to
block out from the direct image of the
star and it's revealed three little red
dots marked B C and D there around this
particular star which goes by the
catalog number 8799
this is from 2008 and what you can see
here is that for some reason that I'm
not entirely sure about we start
labeling the planets in the order of
discovery rather than from the inside
out and we start with B there is no a so
B is the first one to be discovered then
C and then D and they stick to those
names and the order of discovery because
if they discovered another inner planet
or outer planets then obviously they
would have to give it the next letter
and if we tried to do it from inside out
or outside in and we'd be perpetually
renaming them as new ones were found so
it would be chaos so these are attempts
to directly image planets around other
stars
but before we had these modern
instruments and these special
coronagraph telescopes that enabled this
other systems were tried for detecting
planets more indirect perhaps but then
what to not try and look for the light
of the planets but try and look for the
influence of the planets on its parent
star and you can do this by tracking the
motion of the star across the sky this
works best for nearby stars because they
apparent movement across the sky is much
greater if they're at fairly near to us
but if they have a companion planet then
these planet will orbit the star but it
will induce a small wobble in the motion
of the star because in fact both are
orbiting the common center of mass in
the same way as you have a fat person or
a thin person sitting on a seesaw and if
you observe the star moving across the
sky you might expect to see some data
showing its position in both the right
Ascension and declination that's the
longitude and the latitude on the sky
wobbling backwards and forwards as it
progressed along its path a bit as
illustrated in that bottom image there
and a scientist called Pieter van de
Kamp Dutchman decided to have a go at
doing this and for his targets he chose
Barnard's star one of the sun's small
red dwarf neighbors and a very wise
choice because it's very nearby it has a
high motion across the background of
stars as it's orbiting around the
galaxies as we do but slightly different
rates so the position changes quite fast
and also with it being a small star it's
going to be more easily influenced by
the gravity of a decent-sized planet
rather than trying to see the motion in
a very large star where you'd need a
very very large planet in order for
there to be a detectable
Wabble so he was quite wise in choosing
this one and he duly announced that he
had dismayed the discovery of a wobble
and therefore of an extrasolar planet in
fact Peter as I showed of that wobble is
Peters data plotted from 1950 to 1980
there and you can see he's put a
sinusoidal wave through the observations
that are marked with the little round
circles and it looks like there is
roughly a 10-year period to that wobble
that so the orbiter of the planet would
be around about ten years
unfortunately for Peter there is a bit
of a problem nobody else was able to
replicate this and a lot of arguments
Crist sued from it but in the end I'm
afraid the discovery was made that it
was a better answer to put a straight
line through the first part of the data
there and another one there a third line
air and the reason those were chosen was
because it turned out the engineering
department came on a telescope in 1962
and put it back together slightly
differently calibrated you guessed it
ten years later they came and did it
again
so the ten year cycle was the ten year
engineering plan rather than an orbit of
a planet unfortunately and they
disrupted his data in the process so
poor old Peter was unfortunately wrong
but in a strange twist of fate in 2018
the BBC announced on their website the
discovery of planet Barnard be orbiting
around you guessed it Barnard's star so
I think this is a nice end to the story
it turns out that there was a planet
there after all it's just that Peters
technique wasn't really sensitive enough
to find it it's not a particularly large
planet 3.2 times the mass of the earth
and in a Venus
like orbit of 233 days around its little
red dwarf star of course being a red
dwarf star it's not putting out very
much heat and so even though in our
solar system Venus is incredibly hot at
the same distance from a red dwarf star
it's a chilly minus 160 degrees
centigrade so quite a cold planet as it
turns out but the idea of looking for
planets using a wobble of the star
turned out to be very fruitful this
slide illustrates a better way of
getting at and detecting and measuring
that wobble and it's called the radial
velocity method what you can do is use
the light coming from the star and
determine whether the star is moving
relative to you by the Doppler shift of
the light if the star is moving away
from you the light is shifted to the red
end of the spectrum and if it's moving
towards you then it shifted to the blue
end of the spectrum this is very similar
to a police car going whizzing past
where the pitch of the siren will go
near all from high when it's coming
towards you to low when it's going away
from you and the same effect works with
light changes the energy so the energy
is lowered at the wavelength stretched
when it's moving away from you the
wavelengths compressed made higher
energy as it's coming towards you and
higher energy we see in our eyes as blue
and lower as red and you can detect it
by looking at the spectrum of the light
coming from the star and observing
exactly where the little absorption
lines from the different chemical
elements in the atmosphere of the star
occur you can see those move backwards
and forwards as the relative velocity of
the star changes and that tells you what
you need to know in order to find that
there is a planet orbiting around it
because if you plot that relative
velocity as the star wobbles you'll get
and now
wavy line with your observations which
will tell you the periods and position
of the planet relative to the star and
that works very well even with cases as
in the little graphic there where the
center of gravity between the star and
the planet might still lie within the
star so you can really make much more
sensitive measurements than using this
method then you ever could hope to do
with the pure astrometry method relying
on seeing the motion of the star
directly and that was the first method
that really led to the discovery of
planets around other stars
professor Didier quick way laws and his
colleagues detected the planet 51 peg be
using this method back just at the end
of the 1990s
but another method of doing it is to
rely upon luck as to the orientation of
the planet's orbit around its parent
star carrying it across the line of
sight the so called transit method the
idea is if the planet wanders across in
front of the star they all block out
some of the light this is an image of
the planet Venus going in front of the
Sun which I took back in 2004 I think it
was and the little black dot at the
bottom there is Venus it shows how
enormous the Sun is compared to Venus
and of course Venus and the earth are
about the same size but the point is
that as that occurred a little tiny
fraction of the total amount of light
that we would normally get from the Sun
was blocked out now of course we didn't
notice that in the everyday variability
that we see with the weather and all the
rest of it on earth but with very
sensitive instruments you can detect it
and it would be you would stare at a
star and measuring its brightness and
watch for a planet moving across in
front of the star and see that the
output level that you were measuring it
with your measuring device dropped and
then went back to normal
as the planet got out of the way and the
best place to do this to get away from
all the interfering aspects of the earth
space and NASA decided to do this and
launched the Kepler space telescope
now the Kepler space telescope was
designed to stare in one direction at
one pass by' marked out there with the
grid just away from the Milky Way just
off to the side there
and it stared at it for five years
measuring the brightness of a hundred
and fifty thousand stars over and over
and over again continuously now it found
three thousand transits that looked like
planets moving in front of their parent
star and if we do the maths we can work
out that with a collection of stars and
planets all scattered across the sky
with their orbits completely at random
in terms of alignment and there's
nothing special about the direction of
line of sight to the earth so why would
they be lined up they should be
completely randomly distributed there's
about a 1 in 50 chance of a planet being
in the right orbit too for us to see a
transit here on earth while what's
amazing is that 3,000 out of 150,000 2
percent is precisely 1 in 50 and so we
expected out of a random sample to find
no more than 3 thousands and that would
tell us that all stars have planets and
so that's the result that we have here
it's subject to statistics and it might
have been slightly freaky but the odds
are that we were seeing the real case
that almost every star we can reliably
say has got at least one planet in fact
the detection of planets now has gone up
to something like 6,000 and quite a few
of these stars have got multiple planets
this is a poster that's on the wall in
the Institute of astronomy at Cambridge
and it's an artist's representation they
must add of what the relative sizes of
all of the planets that had been found
when the poster was produced were
looking like so there were a lot of
jupiter-like planets some of them bit a
bit bigger some of them down to the
of Neptune and then a reasonable number
of smaller planets getting on down
towards the size of the earth and some
planets that were in between the two now
of course when we're looking for planets
whether we're using the radial velocity
method or the transit method it turns
out to be biased because a large planet
is going to be much easier to find than
a smaller one a jupiter-sized planet
will block out a hundred times more
light as it passes in front of the
parent star than a small earth-like
planet we'll just because of its size
and it will also due to its larger mass
make a greater wobble for the radial
velocity method to latch on to and so we
were starting to find very big planets
some of them many times the size of
Jupiter and gradually as the instruments
are getting better we're finding more
and more of the smaller ones now of
course we're very interested in
earth-like planets and scientists have
come up with an earth similarity index
to try to rank some of these we've set
the earth similarity index of the earth
to be one I suppose that makes sense and
Mars to be 2/3 nor point six six and
that allows us to classify the other
worlds that we're discovering and the
nearest that we have to getting a
perfect score of one so far is Gliese
581g on the left there where they've
given it a score of naught point nine
two so that's really very earth-like
indeed if you look at the other end of
that list there you'll see Gliese 581d
so that's another planet in the same
system and in fact there's a little
diagram showing the Gliese 581 system
compared against our own solar system
we've got the Sun and the four inner
planets and Jupiter shown in our solar
system with the blue band being the
habitable
zone and of course the earth nicely snug
in the habitable zone is just warm
enough for life warm enough for liquid
water to be on the surface it's not too
hot
Venus is perhaps on the too hot side
there on the inner side of that and Mars
actually in the more frigid part of the
solar system slightly further away from
the Sun in the outer edge of what you
might consider the habitable zone but of
course being a smaller planet it doesn't
retain its heat so well but if we look
at Gliese 581 it's a red dwarf star II
all the glaser stars a catalogue of red
dwarfs it and it has planets BCDE F and
G there and G is right slap-bang in the
habitable zone in the region that's
going to be at a nice sensible
temperature for liquid water oceans on
its surface and D a larger planet
sneaking in at the outer edge of the
habitable zone so those two are the two
that are scouring quite high on their
Earth similarity index so very similar
solar system to our own in some ways
isn't minuses the 55 Cancri system and
it's got a small red dwarf star in the
middle and a group of inner rocky
planets and a jupiter-like planet in a
further out orbit so this is looking
really quite like our own home solar
system and that's interesting that's
just going to show that there isn't
really anything very unique at all about
the the earth and its family of planets
and the Sun another one here Kepler 62
again we've got a red dwarf star with a
habitable zone and a couple of
interesting planets nicely in that with
62f there being right in the center of
that habitable zone
but have found some planets that are not
like any that are in our own solar
system these are the super Earths
they're bigger than the earth but
smaller than Neptune or Uranus they're
not gas giants or ice giants they're not
small rocky planets either and here
kepler-22b we've got an artist's
impression of what it might look like
it's 2.4 times the size of the earth and
because it's set that much bigger in
radius its mass is perhaps five to eight
times the mass of the Earth with a
correspondingly much larger volume you
see but it's still a lot less than the
sixteen to twenty earth masses that you
find for Neptune like worlds and we are
starting to find quite a lot of these
now the interesting idea with these
super earth seas because they will have
probably got a rocky core but a larger
one with therefore correspondingly
larger surface gravity they're probably
going to hang on to volatile liquids and
volatile gases like water much more
easily and so the speculation is that
these perhaps would have so much water
that there would be no dry land at all
they would be pure ocean worlds
completely covered in water to the
depths of hundreds of kilometers and
very interesting and different class of
world so that's a Kepler 22b and it
orbits another fairly modest stellar on
the inner edge of the habitable zone so
it's probably at a nice warm temperature
and again that's suggestive of liquid
water oceans I imagine that it might
have a very warm and steamy atmosphere
into the body and and could have a bit
of a runaway greenhouse effect because
it is on the inner edge of that
habitable zone and for a large planet
you perhaps want to be a bit further out
but what about our nearest stellar
neighbors then the the Alpha Centauri
system contains this all red dwarf star
Proxima Centuri the actual nearest star
to the Sun just 4.2 light-years away and
indeed it has a planet Proxima B and
it's an earth-sized planet you can see
we have a quarter of the Sun shown here
we've got Proxima Centauri a red dwarf
star shown to scale and the same scale
images of Jupiter Saturn Proxima B and
the earth now this was determined by the
radial velocity method and the graph of
the data showing the orbits of Proxima
be in that periodic wobble there at the
top
now it's an orbit that's quite a lot
shorter than our own but of course that
brings it closer in and closer in is
what you want if you're orbiting a cool
star like Proxima and it turns out that
it's in the habitable zone but there is
an issue with these red dwarf stars
which is that for the first few hundred
million years of their life they tend to
be very very unruly and produce an awful
lot of solar flares on the outside they
super flares and that pushes the output
of heat up pushes the habitable zone
further away and so it's quite possible
that Proxima be formed too close to its
star and was too hot for a couple of
hundred million years and that might
have stripped away any water that it was
born with now 200 million years later
the habitable zone has moved inwards as
the star has settled down but the
question for us really is did prick
Proxima be how many water left at the
end of it or had it been burnt to a
crisp
now actually we don't really understand
where our own water on earth has come
from we think it might have been
delivered later by a storm of comets or
asteroids bringing a lot of water and
crashing into the earth
so maybe Proxima B will also have picked
up a dose of water after the star has
cooled down and settled down it remains
to be seen we need to study this more
closely and look at other methods of
trying to determine what is going on on
Proxima B before we can say anymore now
I've always been very interested in the
idea of planets around other stars and I
did a lot of work with the Kepler space
telescope using the data that was
publicly available and this is the
planet that I found I used the planet
hunters program and between myself and
four other amateurs we detected three
transits here is the one that I found
that data shows the brightness
measurements as individual dots with
time going across the horizontal axis
and you can see that it was bouncing
around there are flares there a star
spots as all sorts of confounding data
but then suddenly it took a nice dip and
came back up again and that was repeated
on two other different dates and the
gaps between these three made us able to
determine the period of this particular
planet and the planets goes by the
exciting name of kic 9 1 4 789 B because
that's the Kepler input catalog number
at the top there it's 157 light-years
away in the constellation of Cygnus well
it would be that's the only bit of sky
that Kepler looked at and the star 9 1 4
702 9 is a star about 80% of the mass of
the Sun but it's a little bit more
evolved and we detected these transit
dips every three hundred and ninety
seven and a half days
so that's 13 months apart three of them
and each time the light dropped it by
0.3% so it's a very small drop you're
looking for actually but 0.3% tells us
how much light was blocked by the planet
and it tells us the size of the planet
and that works out to be about the same
size as Neptune
now the interesting up to this up at the
top left there we've got the star itself
in negative image we're not actually
able to see the planet directly but the
star is f-type and 200 degrees C hotter
on its surface than our Sun and a naught
point three percent drop in the light
and a three hundred and ninety seven and
a half day thirteen month orbit puts the
Neptune sized planet at one point one
astronomical units from its central star
so it's a little bit further away from a
hotter fire and it's right in the
habitable zone and it was one of the
first habitable planets to be discovered
or in the habitable zone rather not
necessarily actually habitable it's we
don't know the nature of it yet but was
one of the first planets to lie in the
habitable zone discovered by the Kepler
data now the planets itself at Neptune
sized might not be somewhere you would
want to go for your holidays if it's an
ice giant or a gas giant or a warm gas
giant or something like that
might be quite an unpleasant environment
but we've got to remember our solar
system if you've listened to my talk
fire and ice the volcanic worlds of the
solar system you'll recognize these
images of top layer after Europa at the
bottom right Enceladus series there and
Titan and in even there are others in
our solar system that have potential
habitable zones within the world's
themselves inside protected by an ice
covering these water ice warm briny
oceans that could be somewhere that life
could evolve and of course it's entirely
possible that okay I see 9 1 4 789 B
being the size of Neptune is going to
have its own family of moons so maybe
there could be
habitable moon orbiting around this gas
giant at just the right distance from
the Sun to have itself a habitable
surface and with the Kepler data people
have started to go looking for these and
Kepler 1625 B is a 10 jupiter-mass
planet and it has a Neptune sized moon
orbiting it was the first EXO moon to be
discovered but the latest is is we've
had a look at 76 of the habitable zone
planets around sun-like stars so g-type
stars
thus sadly ignoring mine because it's an
f-type star and the transit times of the
main planet vary slightly if they've got
a decent sized moon because the planets
and the moon are orbiting around their
common center of mass and so if it
happens that as the transit across the
face of the star occurs the moon is
leading along the orbit then the planet
will be delayed slightly and if the moon
is in a different position around its
orbit and trailing along the line of
sights then the main planet will arrive
a little early and we've been able to
detect that and it looks like we're
beginning to time these sufficiently
accurately to prove the existence of
quite a few of these exomoons so the
science continues
now what we really wanted to be able to
do is characterize not just the orbits
and perhaps the masses of these planets
and their sizes and of course if we have
the size and the mass we can work out
the average density and start to make
guesses about what they might be made of
but what we really want to do is study
their atmospheres and see if we can find
signs of life you might go about doing
that is to split the light from the
planet up into its spectrum and see if
you can measure the characteristic dips
in the light curve corresponding to the
wavelengths that are absorbed by
molecules that are associated with life
so perhaps oxygen or ozone might be a
good thing to go and look for in the
atmospheres of these planets I tried the
technique and it works our own solar
system and the good news was we were
able to detect life on Earth so the blue
trace across the top there is the earth
and you can see that there is a very
pronounced dip for ozone and for carbon
dioxide and the signature of water there
he also looked at the light from the
planet Venus
and so now ozone lots of carbon dioxide
of course and for Mars there at the
bottom the red trace just carbon dioxide
lesser signature because it's a smaller
planet with a thinner atmosphere
but we can do this and it's amazing that
we can for planets around other stars
and we kept a - mission has detected
water in a Goldilocks zone planet around
the star K 2:18 so K 2:18 B has water
vapor making up about 50% of its
atmosphere and this is one of those
super Earths the mass is around 8 times
that of the earth the radius 2.7 times
that of the earth and it's orbiting it's
rather small star at a period of 33 days
so it's year is 33 of our earth days
long just naught point one astronaut one
for astronomical units from its parent
star at that distance it's getting 94%
of the hate that we get from our Sun and
so the temperature would be around minus
8 to plus five degrees before any
greenhouse effect and with that much
water vapor in the atmosphere that's
going to give it quite a substantial
boost in temperature the water is a very
powerful greenhouse gas and lift the
temperature up so this is probably quite
a warm steamy planet
and it of course might have a very deep
water ocean underneath the atmosphere be
highly likely in terms of discovering
sheer numbers of planets guy a
spacecraft up there mapping 1 billion
stars and it's also looking to see if it
finds radial velocity variations and
transits and it's expected that the Gaia
data once it's been fully released it's
gonna yield around about a million
planets and this is going to be
absolutely enormous amount of work to go
and follow up the all these planets that
we will then know about or just can't
imagine the the changes that have
occurred in our knowledge from 20 years
or so ago where we really didn't know if
there are any out there at all as
another couple of spacecraft tests that
arest riyal planet finder and key ops
which is looking to study the
atmospheres density and composition of
planets so they are picking nearby earth
like stars and looking at them in great
detail and measuring the atmosphere and
we should learn a lot from these once
their data is in they've only just
started to come up with some results
this year so the amazing thing is that's
a pad
a case like this I've certainly never
seen a fleet of spacecraft crossing the
sky and great Enrico ferme he came up
with the quote at the bottom there so
where is everybody there are so many
stars out there 400 billion in our
galaxy alone most of them we know have
planets and families of planets and a
lot of them that are very very old and
even some that are much older than the
earth so why are we not seeing aliens
flying around all over the place
perhaps you are but personally I never
have so we can start to try and answer
this question by dissecting it down a
bit but first of all I think the nature
of the star is important only best it's
not too old it's formed long long time
ago when the universe was very young the
universe would also been very clean
stars are nuclear pressure cookers for
the elements they cook up new material
and when they die throw it back out to
be formed into second and third
generations of planetary systems and we
think our own solar system is a third
generation of this process and if you
don't have those elements that are
cooked up inside the cause of giant
stars like iron which is in our blood an
oxygen which we breathe and all the
other elements that go together to make
biochemistry the rich and complex
process that it is you really can't get
very far so stars that are too old
probably don't have very many planets if
the stars too young well it seems from
McDonald here on earth that it took an
awful long time for complex creatures to
evolve the earth has had signs of life
on it and the most recent I've read
about date back to 3.8 billion years ago
out of the four billion years since the
earth had a molten surface and wouldn't
have been habitable so
being life on Earth almost the entire
lifespan of the earth bar that first 200
million years perhaps but it's a an
awful long time before concrete complex
creatures managed to discover the trick
of evolving to produce the rich diverse
life we see around that's really only a
very recent phenomenon the other thing
you don't want of your star it's rigged
because massive stars live fast and die
young
they start off burning at a very very
high temperature and they rush through
their nuclear fuel disproportionately
rapidly until they explode as a
supernova so I wouldn't recommend that
for somewhere to have a planet
especially as as we've just discussed it
takes a very long time for evolution to
do its work perhaps don't want your star
to be too small either small stars have
narrow habitable zones and as we were
talking about with Proxima be those
habitable zones can move as the star
evolves and so maybe it's difficult for
a planet to remain in the habitable zone
of a small star but I'm not so sure
about this one there are other factors
at work so matters as to where you are
in your host galaxy if you're right in
the middle in the core the stars are
really closely packed together in might
have binary or multiple star systems you
might be part of a cluster or the
nucleus of the galaxy where it's not
very far to another star system and a
very spectacular for astronomers but
also every chance that you don't have a
supernova blow up nearby very very soon
because just of the sheer statistics of
how many stars there are
same applies really to the spiral arms
where a lot of new stars get formed and
along with new stars you get giant stars
being formed and they of course blow up
as supernovae and they can sterilize
planets within a few hundred light-years
of themselves quite easily with all the
gamma rays that come off when they
explode there's a soup that is the most
recent one we've actually caught on film
this was in the Large Magellanic Cloud
in 1987 160,000 light years away so it's
far enough away in distant space not to
be a nuisance to us at all but if you
had one in your backyard that would be
very bad I know there's been a lot of
speculation recently about the star
Betelgeuse which seemed to be dimming
and changing that's also too far away
from us to do us any harm if it blew up
as a supernova it's about 600 light
years away and we reckon a hundred light
years is the safety zone so I already
said eat all that long period of time
here's an illustration of the rise of
life way back at four billion years just
after and you can see that for about
another two billion years all there was
on earth was simple single-celled
organisms and it's really only in the
last 500 million years from the age of
the trilobites onwards that anything
very interesting happened leading up to
Nautilus and plants and dinosaurs and
small furry creatures and astronomers
right at the last minute there and we
really are very very new and novel
indeed but you've also not have a
catastrophe these misses a plot of the
last 500 million years and each spike is
a mass extinction the the one that's
second from the right that's underneath
the the K and P G boxes at the top there
which are the Cretaceous and the modern
era
that's the 66 million year ago and I
of the dinosaurs but you can see there's
been other mass extinctions the worst
one being between the P Permian and
Triassic periods there where a very
large slice of the life on Earth was
wiped out and if this happens too often
then you know you keep getting your
biological evolution reset back to much
simpler organisms it could be quite a
limitation for getting sophisticated
life I mentioned that my lab here they
are they ruled the earth for 270 million
years so that's an awful lot longer than
humans have been on earth we've been
around for perhaps two million years the
trilobite have outdone us by a hundred
and something to 1 so far but they came
to a sticky end 444 million years ago
and it was a very large star a hyper
giant star undergoing the collapse in
the center of its core and creating a
hypernova which generates a gamma-ray
burst of enormous power and there's
evidence that those gamma rays wiped out
an enormous slice of the creatures on
the earth even down into some of the
shallow oceans and we've detected the
radio isotope signature of this gamma
ray burst
I mentioned the odd on a source
it was astronomy that got them as well
this time it was an incoming space rock
that smashed into the earth just off the
coast of Mexico and set fire to all the
woods and forests of the earth all in
one go and also through enormous amounts
of sulfur dioxide up into the sky
because it so happened it landed right
in the worst place in a portion of the
Earth's crust where there are a lot of
sulfates so there's probably a hundred
years of the climate being completely
wrecked as this mega impact occurred
actually it could have been part of a
shower of comets because there are some
other craters of roughly the same age
that we're beginning to find as well so
the story on that one's still evolving
and I must say there are some people
that think that this was actually all
due to giant eruptions of volcanoes over
in India the so-called Deccan Traps
that were happening around about the
same time and perhaps the both were
occurring and both were partly
responsible perhaps the volcanoes were
doing the climate quite a lot of damage
and the asteroid was the killer punch
that finished the dinosaurs off and so
really the queries everybody comes down
to one giant Goldilocks effect your
solar system not stabbed it needs to be
not too clean so you've got some
interesting chemistry certainly needs to
be not too exciting from the point of
view of catastrophes the star needs to
be not too big and not too small just
right so it's hot enough stable that
lives a long time and the planet needs
to be not too near and not too far and
just the right size because all of those
criteria off you might've discovered one
planet zone like the one I did stable oh
yes okay I see nine one four seven oh
two nine is perfectly stable in a nice
neighborhood and it may well have liquid
water on its oceans or if it doesn't it
may have a moon that does and it's
probably billions of years old and so
had plenty of time for complex life to
him oh it's even got intelligent beings
there maybe those things can communicate
we still might not hear from them
because you can tick all of those boxes
for the earth and this guy he lives in
the water and he's very smart he can
communicate with his own species and all
good except because he lives in the
water he's going to have a very hard
time making fire and therefore refer
metals building transistor radios or
building spaceships and so we may never
hear from him and quite a lot of these
habitable zones that we're finding out
there in the solar system are
water-based and possibly with enormous
oceans either covered in ice and no land
at all or so much water that their
oceans are thousands of kilometers deep
on many of these super Earths they still
could have incredibly smart creatures
living within them but they're probably
going to be able to do this and I'll
just leave this as the final slide of
this talk I think we must remember that
they're really unlikely evolutionary
outcome is the one you see in front of
you humans we